Israel's Army is calling on residents of
gaza's southern city of Rapa to evacuate
to a humanitarian area Israel's defense
minister says military action in Rafa is
necessary because Hamas is refusing
truce proposals that would free hostages
held in Gaza Palestinians in Rafa's East
have been told to go to the al- maazi
refugee camp near kanun a senior Hamas
official has called it a dangerous
escalation there's been growing
International alarm over an assault in
Rafa more than a million people have
been Sheltering there since war broke
out after the October 7 Terror attacks
by
Hamas these displaced Palestinians in
Rafa are again preparing to
move they have received orders from the
Israeli Army to leave the eastern part
of the
city we have no shelter no food no water
none of that we were promised by the
Israeli Army and the International
Community that Rafa would be protected
and that's why we came here but I regret
to say they've told us to evacuate or
we'll face something that no one wishes
to
face where am I to go I don't have money
or anything I'm so tired me and the
children who are with me where are we to
go the Israeli military says it is
evacuating 100,000 people from Eastern
Rafa they are being told to go to the
al- mawasi humanitarian area shown here
in red Israel says it has now expanded
this Zone to handle the
influx Israel describes Rafa as the last
significant Hamas strong hold after 7
months of War triggered by the October
7th Terror
attacks Rafa has been targeted by isra
air strikes but there is now growing
International concern over a ground
assault
eight groups say that would be
catastrophic for the more than a million
Palestinians Sheltering in the
city for more on this I'm joined now
here in the studio by Carl scow he's the
deputy executive director of the world
food program one of the main
organizations delivering life-saving Aid
to Gaza thank you very much for being
with us today now the ceasefire talks
have stalled again Hamas has fired
rockets at Israeli positions killing
several Israelis sold
Israel now says it will go ahead with
its assault on Rafa what do you make of
these latest developments what are the
implications for the humanitarian
situation in gasa well we are of course
extremely concerned about these latest
developments not least for the civilians
that are in GA in Rafa at the moment
more than half of the population more
than one million people is in gasa so uh
you know it is first and foremost Our
concern for for those civilians if this
operation goes ahead but secondly of
course we all as humanitarians operate
out of Gaza and we've been
using Shalom as the main entry point
into Gaza so also the implications for
our humanitarian operation risk being
huge and this was at the moment where we
were beginning to get more access where
were beginning to get some Traction in
our efforts to push back uh on the
famine not least in the north of so this
risk to bring us back basically when we
were about to make some progress on on
the humanitarian front so definitely a
setback what are you hearing from your
colleagues in Gaza right now about the
situation on the ground there well of
course extremely concerned again we are
also looking at how we can move uh our
staff uh and our warehouses uh uh our
vehicles and Facilities uh further up
north at the moment or we had already
begun to do so over the past few weeks
so that we can continue to keep our
operations up and running you know we
have able to reach about a million
people a month uh during this crisis
thanks to support from donors like
Germany and again we were about to step
up that support not least in the north
where we have seen you know the most
severe uh needs and so uh you know we
were hoping that we would rather see a
ceasefire so that we can scale up
further reaching you know beyond uh the
million up to two million people um a
month and not least those most
vulnerable up in the north instead we've
seen these rocket attacks Israeli
soldiers killed border crossings closed
instead of being opening instead of
opening uh Israel says it's doing
everything in its power to prevent
civilian casualties uh based on what
you've been seeing in hearing would you
say that Israel has indeed taken all
measures necessary to protect
civilians I mean looking at Rafa more
specifically I visited Rafa I mean it's
a place that is jammed with internally
displaced people
uh everywhere there are camping on the
streets the sidewalks uh schools any
public building has been overtaken as a
shelter uh and so it's very difficult to
see a military operation in that Urban
environment that doesn't also have
civilian cash so again we are extremely
concerned about that and we are
extremely concerned Beyond as I
mentioned we had been in the past three
weeks been able to get into the north uh
we have opened some 16 bakeries across
uh the strip uh only the past week we
were able to use also the northern
crossing erit crossing into gasa and so
again we were able to see some traction
what we would hope for was to rather now
be able to diversify our assistance not
only food but go into also nutritional
supplementals restocking some of the
health centers because that's also
needed not least with the most
malnutrition vulnerable children but
again yeah extremely concerning
developments overnight you're executive
director at at the world food program uh
Cindy McCain she says that there's a
quote full-blown famine uh in the north
of Gaza can you tell us how many people
there have actually perished for lack of
food or or suffering from M nutrition we
don't have that exact data uh because
also surveys are difficult to do not
least in the north where the situation
is uh the worse and we don't make that
formal declaration it's done through a
scientific rigorous Pro but what we can
point to is family like conditions in
parts of Northern Gaza when we have now
had new access to certain areas people
are climbing out of the rubble and
extremely weak and we've also seen
children who have hunger related death
or have died from Hunger related
diseases and so uh you know we have
famine likee conditions um uh we had
been able to open up four bakeries in
the North in the past two weeks only H
and you know uh being able to bring
people bread for the first time in 6
months it's not not only important for
the food that he carries but also for
psychological impact bread is a key
element for the Palestinian people so
there was also some element of Hope
there and I just really hope that we can
continue to build on that that progress
that was made and that it's not reversed
with this latest development Carl thank
you very much for talking with us that
was Carl scy Deputy executive director
of the world food program thank you for
having